Applying machine learning to improve simulations of a chaotic dynamical system using empirical error correction

Dynamical weather and climate prediction models underpin many studies of the Earth system and hold the promise of being able to make robust projections of future climate change based on physical laws. However, simulations from these models still show many di erences compared with observations. Machine learning has been applied to solve certain prediction problems with great success, and recently it's been proposed that this could replace the role of physically-derived dynamical weather and climate models to give better quality simulations. Here, instead, a framework using machine learning together with physically-derived models is tested, in which it is learnt how to correct the errors of the latter from timestep to timestep. This maintains the physical understanding built into the models, whilst allowing performance improvements, and also requires much simpler algorithms and less training data. This is tested in the context of simulating the chaotic Lorenz '96 system, and it is shown that the approach yields models that are stable and that give both improved skill in initialised predictions and better long-term climate statistics. Improvements in long-term statistics are smaller than for single time-step tendencies, however, indicating that it would be valuable to develop methods that target improvements on longer time scales. Future strategies for the development of this approach and possible applications to making progress on important scienti c problems are discussed. Numerical weather prediction and climate models attempt to predict and simulate components of the Earth system, including the atmosphere and perhaps also the oceans, land surface and biosphere. Whilst the fundamental physical equations governing the system are known, they cannot be solved accurately with available computational resources. Instead, approximations are made in the models' equations, and this gives rise to errors in their output. Methods to reduce these errors are highly valuable for giving better warning of major meteorological and climatic events. Recently, great advances in machine learning have taken place, for example in the domains of image recognition and game-playing [e.g. He et al., 2016; Silver et al., 2017]. The algorithms developed have been found to excel at certain problems that involve predicting an unknown value given values of predictor variables (for example, predicting what objects a photograph contains given its pixel values)|this is similar to the problem of predicting future behaviour of the Earth system given knowledge of its past and present state, and so there has been high interest in applying
