Application of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for Detecting Extreme Weather in Climate Datasets

-
Detecting extreme events in large datasets is a major
challenge in climate science research. Current algorithms for
extreme event detection are build upon human expertise in
1 de ning events based on subjective thresholds of relevant
v physical variables. Often, multiple competing methods
pro6 duce vastly di erent results on the same dataset. Accurate
5 characterization of extreme events in climate simulations
11 and observational data archives is critical for
understand0 ing the trends and potential impacts of such events in a
. climate change content. This study presents the rst
appli5 cation of Deep Learning techniques as alternative
method0 ology for climate extreme events detection. Deep neural
6 networks are able to learn high-level representations of a
:1 broad class of patterns from labeled data. In this work, we
v developed deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
clasi si cation system and demonstrated the usefulness of Deep
X Learning technique for tackling climate pattern detection
r problems. Coupled with Bayesian based hyper-parameter
a optimization scheme, our deep CNN system achieves
89%99% of accuracy in detecting extreme events (Tropical
Cyclones, Atmospheric Rivers and Weather Fronts).
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD 2016 August 13-17, San Francisco, CA, USA
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-2138-9. . . $15.00
DOI: 10.475/123 4
